now to the war in Gaza and Hamas has
responded to the us back proposal for a
ceasefire in Gaza saying it wants some
amendments to the deal neither Israel
nor Hamas have publicly committed to the
plan the United States had been hoping
for an outright acceptance of the deal
by both sides Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin has spent the last few days
traveling across the Middle East trying
to promote it on Monday the UN Security
Council endorsed the plan calling on
both Israel and Hamas to enact it
immediately without
conditions let's take a closer look now
at the original deal that blinkin is
trying to get all siid to sign up to
it's made up of three phases in the
first the release of some hostages the
return of Palestinian prisoners and
partial troop withdrawal under a six we
truce the second includes a permanent
ceasefire yet to be negotiated that
would mean the full withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the strip the third
phase would focus on a plan to rebuild
Gaza well for more on this Let's cross
over to Professor Simon mayborne he's a
Middle East Analyst at Lancaster
University in the UK thanks for being
with us Simon Israel and Hamas are under
huge pressure to approve the unbacked
ceasefire proposal for Gaza what's your
assessment of the likelihood of this
deal actually getting done
oh yeah you're right to say there is
huge pressure here on all sides it is
pretty clear from the UN making this
commitment at Security Council passing
this resolution that there is growing
pressure on Israel on Hamas to actually
get a ceasefire and that's unsurprising
given the scale of the humanitarian
suffering the scale of the devastation
across Gaza now the likelihood of it
actually coming off however is I think
uh pretty difficult to assess the first
phase of of of the plan as you've just
outlined is is perhaps the most probable
and the most likely but it gets far
thornier and Far more complex when we
move into phases two and three and I I'm
particularly worried when we get to
those
stages now Kat has been hosting these
truce talks and other Arab countries
like Egypt and Jordan are involved too
how much influence Simon do do these
countries have in the negotiations
especially with respect to
Hamas well it's about putting pressure
on Hamas and I think in the sense that
that Qatar has has long been a an ally a
host of Hamas not necessarily a
supporter but they've been open to to to
playing home to some of the Hamas
figures like khed Michel who who fled
Gaza in the past so it has a good deal
of influence in that respect and also
perhaps the more important thing is that
it has the money and Hamas is obviously
particularly concerned about how Gaza is
going to be rebuilt the money has to be
found somewhere and the Gulf States
Qatar uh in particular is going to have
a big role to play so I would imagine
that Doha has got the ability to exert a
good deal of influence but it's not so
much the Hamas side that that I think is
the concern here with regard to
accepting this deal we've heard key
figures suggesting that they they are
willing to accept it it's more on the
Israeli side I think that's where things
get really complex H tell us more about
how the Hamas leadership is dealing with
this situation is it is it clear to you
what their strategy
is not particularly I think from the
from the very offset of all of this on
October 7 it's clear that that the Hamas
leadership has has set out on a
particular trajectory and found itself
in in waters that it didn't necessarily
want to find itself in um we've heard
that the actual attack that was planned
was far more limited than than what
actually happened and that the the
devastation of that terrorist attack was
not what was originally intended or at
least so we are led to believe so that
tells us that there is a lack of
coordination there is a lack of a clear
strategy and that's certainly coming out
um with regard to what has been
happening in Gaza in the in the months
since and that's not surprising given
the political situation in Gaza given
the realities on the ground of life in
Gaza in this conflict there's intense
speculation Simon about what will become
of Gaza after the war ends uh what do
you think is the most likely scenario
for how that territory will be
governed well it depends who you're
asking here because the International
Community wants the PA to be the the
main sort of driver of politics in
palestin auth in the Gaza Strip Israel
the Palestinian Authority yes sorry uh
the Israelis are perhaps a little less
inclined to do that because that opens
the door for Hamas influence and
Benjamin Netanyahu has said that there
can be no Hamas in Gaza he's he's hung
his hat on this idea of defeating Hamas
and eradicating it and that leaves a bit
of a problem a conundrum because
understandably the Israelis do not want
a Hamas presence in Gaza because they
have just enjoyed this absolutely
devastating terrorist attack but at the
same time the International Community
wants a democratic space for people to
engage politically in Gaza and that
could potentially as it has done in the
past lead to Kamas and that would be onp
palatable for many in Israel and indeed
many in the International Community so
there's a there's a real conundrum here
as to what happens next but I think in
terms of the most likely scenario I
would imagine it would be some type of
either Arab or International
peacekeeping force that would serve as a
transitionary sort of role but then what
happens after that is the big question
it's kicking the question of the quote
unquote the day after just a little bit
further down the road Simon thank you
very much that was Simon maybon Middle
East analyst and professor at Lancaster
University in the
UK let's crawl straight over to our
Jerusalem correspondent Rebecca ritters
Rebecca what are you hearing about
efforts to finalize this deal we
understand that Hamas is proposing new
conditions yeah that's right Terry late
last evening we got word that Hamas had
finally uh handed over their um response
their official response it was much
awaited to the Egyptian and Qatari
negotiators and within that response
we're hearing that amendments uh have
been requested that they haven't given
their allout uh approval of the the
current deal on the table we know that
it's also now with us negotiators and
and all three parties are mulling over
just the requests that are being you
know asked by Hamas so we don't know any
detail uh about what those are we do
know that there was uh a more stringent
timeline given to a permanent ceasefire
and that Hamas have reiterated or
reaffirmed that their priority is indeed
that permanent ceasefire we heard from a
Hamas spokes person who said that this
is a clear clear reaffirmation of our
commitment to a ceasefire and that the
response is uh responsible serious and
positive certainly wanting to at least
appear that they are trying to work
towards this uh agreement or working
towards uh perhaps a slightly different
agreement now it's probably not the
response that the US were hoping before
we know that they would have much
preferred an all out thumbs up from
Hamas uh but I think it comes as no
surprise as Hamas had been saying all
along that they wouldn't enter into a
deal that didn't have a clear uh outcome
of a permanent
ceasefire what about the Israeli side
Rebecca the US says Israel has agreed to
the deal why have we not heard that from
Israel
directly well Israel has been sending
some mixed messages when it comes to
this deal the US has certainly been
selling this deal as an Israeli backed
deal and saying that Israel has been on
board Secretary of State Anthony blinkin
when he was here um you know again said
that he was reaffirmed by Benjamin
Netanyahu the prime minister of Israel
uh that they were behind the deal uh and
and that they were committed to it but
we didn't hear anything official now
yesterday before hamas's response we got
word sort of by way of an Israeli uh
government spokesperson largely thought
to be from the prime minister's office
to say that again that Israel were
behind the deal but that their priority
was of course to be able to complete
their military aims meaning that they
wanted to completely dismantle Hamas and
therefore you know therefore tacitly
don't agree to a permanent ceasefire we
know that Israel you know is now the
government is never very reliant on the
far-right factions of its uh government
and they are saying that they will they
will break up the Coalition the
governing coalition if it enters into
any agreement that moves towards a
permanent ceasefire before they complete
their military aims the us trying to
sell it as to Israel basically saying
that they have completed their military
aims that they have destroyed Hamas that
Hamas isn't capable of carrying out
another October 7 and therefore trying
to be able to tell those farri people
that they have completed those aims but
clearly not really getting that over the
line and I I think we wouldn't have seen
an allout commitment to that proposal
from the Israeli side either Rebecca
thank you our correspondent Rebecca R's
there in Jerusalem